--- Page 1 ---
Death
Author(s): Thomas Nagel
Source: Noûs, Vol. 4, No. 1 (Feb., 1970), pp. 73-80
Published by: Wiley
Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/2214297 .
Accessed: 11/12/2014 18:41
Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at .
http://www.jstor.org/page/info/about/policies/terms.jsp
.
JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide range of
content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and facilitate new forms
of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.
.
Wiley is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access to Noûs.
http://www.jstor.org
This content downloaded from 129.2.19.102 on Thu, 11 Dec 2014 18:41:04 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

--- Page 2 ---
SIXTH SYMPOSIUM
Death
THOMAS NAGEL
PRINCETON UNIVERSITY
Commentators: MARY MOThERSILL BARNARD COLLEGE
FREDERICK CROSSON UNIVERSITY OF
NOTRE DAME
"The syllogism he had learnt from Kiesewetter's Logic: 'Caius is
a man, men are mortal, therefore Caius is mortal,' had always
seemed to him correct as applied to Caius, but certainly not as
applied to himself . . . What did Caius know of the smell of that
stripedleatherball Vanyahad been so fond of?"
Tolstoy
The Death of Ivan Ilych
If, as many people believe, death is the unequivocal and
permanent end of our existence, the question arises whether it is
a bad thing to die. There is conspicuous disagreement about the
matter: some people think death is dreadful; others have no objec-
tion to death per se, though they may hope their own will be
neither premature nor painful.
Those in the former category tend to think those in the latter
are blind to the obvious, while the latter suppose the former to be
prey to some sort of confusion. On the one hand it can be said that
life is all one has, and the loss of it is the greatest loss one can
sustain. On the other hand it may be objected that death deprives
this supposed loss of its subject, and that if, one realizes that death
is not an unimaginable condition of the persisting person, but a
mere blank, one will see that it can have no value whatever, positive
or negative.
73
This content downloaded from 129.2.19.102 on Thu, 11 Dec 2014 18:41:04 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

--- Page 3 ---
74 NOUS
Since I want to leave aside the question whether we are, or
might be, immortal in some form, I shall simply use the word
'death' and its cognates in this discussion to mean permanent death,
unsupplemented by any form of conscious survival. I wish to con-
sider whether death is in itself an evil; and how great an evil, and
of what kind, it might be. This question should be of interest even
to those who believe that we do not die permanently, for one's
attitude towards immortality must depend in part on one's attitude
towards death.
Clearly if death is an evil at all, it cannot be because of its
positive features, but only because of what it deprives us of. I
shall try to deal with the difficulties surrounding the natural view
that death is an evil because it brings to an end all the goods that
life contains. An account of these goods need not occupy us here,
except to observe that some of them, like perception, desire, activity,
and thought, are so general as to be constitutive of human life.
They are widely regarded as formidable benefits in themselves,
despite the fact that they are conditions of misery as well as
happiness, and that a sufficient quantity of more particular evils
can perhaps outweigh them.
I wish to add only two observations. First, the value of life
and its contents does not attach to mere organic survival: almost
everyone would be indifferent (other things equal) between im-
mediate death and immediate coma followed by death twenty years
later without reawakening. And secondly, like most goods, this
one can be multiplied by time: more is better than less. (It should
be remarked that the added quantities need not be temporally
continuous. People are attracted to the possibility of long-term
suspended animation or freezing, followed by the resumption of
conscious life, because they can regard it from within simply as a
continuation of their present life. If these techniques are ever per-
fected, what from outside appeared as a dormant interval of three
hundred years could be experienced by the subject as nothing
more than a sharp discontinuity in the character of his experiences.)
If we turn from what is good about life to what is bad about
death, the case is completely different. Essentially, though there
may be problems about their specification, what we find desirable in
life are certain states, conditions, or types of activity. It is being
alive, doing certain things, having certain experiences, that we
consider good. But if death is an evil, it is the loss of life, rather
than the state of being dead, or non-existent, or unconscious, that
This content downloaded from 129.2.19.102 on Thu, 11 Dec 2014 18:41:04 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

--- Page 4 ---
DEATH 75
is objectionable. This asymmetry is important. If it is good to be
alive, that advantage can be attributed to a person at each point
of his life. It is a good of which Bach had more than Schubert,
simply because he lived longer. Death, however, is not an evil of
which Shakespeare has so far received a larger portion than
Proust. If death is a disadvantage, it is not easy to say when a
man suffers it.
Two other facts indicate that we do not object to death
merely because it involves long periods of nonexistence. First,
as has been mentioned, most of us would not regard the temporary
suspension of life, even for substantial intervals, as in itself a mis-
fortune. If it develops that people can be frozen without reduction
of the conscious lifespan, it will be inappropriate to pity those who
are temporarily out of circulation. Secondly, none of us existed
before we were born (or conceived), but few regard that as a
misfortune. I shall have more to say about this later.
The point that death is not regarded as an unfortunate state
enables us to refute a curious but very common suggestion about
the origin of the fear of death. It is often said that those who object
to death have made the mistake of trying to imagine what it is like
to be dead. It is alleged that the failure to realize that this task is
logically impossible (for the banal reason that there is nothing to
imagine) leads to the conviction that death is a mysterious and
therefore terrifying prospective state. But this diagnosis is evidently
false, for it is just as impossible to imagine being totally unconscious
as to imagine being dead, (though it is easy enough to imagine
oneself, from the outside, in either of those conditions). Yet people
who are averse to death are not usually averse to unconsciousness
(so long as it does not entail a substantial cut in the total duration
of waking life).
If we are to make sense of the view that to die is bad, it must
be on the ground that life is a good and death is the corresponding
deprivation or loss, bad not because of any positive features but
because of the desirability of what it removes. We must now turn
to the serious difficulties which this hypothesis raises, difficulties
about loss and privation in general, and about death in particular.
Essentially there are three types of problem. First, doubt may
be raised whether anything can be bad for a man without being
positively unpleasant to him: specifically, it may be doubted that
there are any evils which consist merely in the deprivation or ab-
sence of possible goods, and which do not depend on someone's
This content downloaded from 129.2.19.102 on Thu, 11 Dec 2014 18:41:04 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

--- Page 5 ---
76 NOUS
minding that deprivation. Secondly, there are special difficulties, in
the case of death, about how the supposed misfortune is to be
assigned to a subject at all. There is doubt both as to who its sub-
ject is, and as to when he undergoes it. So long as a person exists,
he has not yet died, and once he has died, he no longer exists; so
there seems to be no time when death, if it is a misfortune, can be
ascribed to its unfortunate subject. The third type of difficulty con-
cerns the asymmetry, mentioned above, between our attitudes to
posthumous and prenatal nonexistence. How can the former be bad
if the latter is not?
It should be recognized that if these are valid objections to
counting death as an evil, they will apply to many other supposed
evils as well. The first type of objection is expressed in general form
by the common remark that what you don't know can't hurt you. It
means that even if a man is betrayed by his friends, ridiculed be-
hind his back, and despised by people who treat him politely to his
face, none of it can be counted as a misfortune for him so long as he
does not suffer as a result. It means that a man is not injured if his
wishes are ignored by the executor of his will, or if, after his death,
the belief becomes current that all the literary works on which his
fame rests were really written by his brother, who died in Mexico
at the age of twenty-eight. It seems to me worth asking what as-
sumptions about good and evil lead to these drastic restrictions.
All the questions have something to do with time. There cer-
tainly are goods and evils of a simple kind (including some pleasures
and pains) which a person possesses at a given time simply in
virtue of his condition at that time. But this is not true of all the
things we regard as good or bad for a man. Often we need to know
his history to tell whether something is a misfortune or not; this
applies to ills like deterioration, deprivation, and damage. Some-
times his experiential state is relatively unimportant-as in the case
of a man who wastes his life in the cheerful pursuit of a method of
communicating with asparagus plants. Someone who holds that all
goods and evils must be temporally assignable states of the person
may of course try to bring difficult cases into line by pointing to the
pleasure or pain that more complicated goods and evils cause. Loss,
betrayal, deception, and ridicule are on this view bad because
people suffer when they learn of them. But it should be asked how
our ideas of human value would have to be constituted to accom-
modate these cases directly instead. (This would enable us to ex-
plain why their discovery causes suffering.) One possible account is
This content downloaded from 129.2.19.102 on Thu, 11 Dec 2014 18:41:04 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

--- Page 6 ---
DEATH 77
that most good and ill fortunehas as its subject a person identified
by his history and his possibilities,rather than merely by his cate-
gorical state of the moment-and that while this subject can be
exactly located in a sequence of places and times, the same is not
necessarilytrue of the goods and ills that befall him.
These ideas can be illustrated by an example of deprivation
whose severity approaches that of death. Suppose an intelligent
person receives a brain injury that reduces him to the mental con-
dition of a contentedinfant, and that such desires as remainto him
are satisfied by a custodian, so that he is free from care. Such a
developmentwould be widely regardedas a severe misfortune,not
only for his friends and relations, or for society, but also, and
primarily,for the person himself. This does not mean that a con-
tented infant is unfortunate.The intelligent adult who has been
reduced to t-hisconditionis the subject of the misfortune.He is the
one we pity, though of course he does not mind his condition-
there is some doubt, in fact, whether he can be said to exist any
longer.
The view that such a man has suffered a misfortuneis open
to the same objectionswhich have been raised in regard to death.
He does not mind his condition. It is in fact the same condition he
was in at the age of three months, except that he is bigger. If we
did not pity him then, why pity him now; in any case, who is there
to pity? The intelligent adult has disappeared,and for a creature
like the one before us, happiness consists in a full stomach and a
dry diaper.
If these objections are invalid, it must be because they rest
on a mistakenassumptionabout the temporalrelation between the
subject of a misfortune and the circumstanceswhich constitute it.
If, instead of concentratingexclusively on the oversized baby be-
fore us, we consider the person he was, and the person he could
be now, then his reduction to this state and the cancellation of
his natural adult development constitute a perfectly intelligible
catastrophe.
This case should convince us that it is arbitraryto restrictthe
goods and evils that can befall a man to nonrelationalproperties
ascribableto him at particulartimes. As it stands, that restriction
excludesnot only such cases of gross degeneration,but also a good
deal of what is importantabout success and failure, and other fea-
tures of a life that have the characterof processes.I believe we can
go further, however. There are goods and evils which are irre-
This content downloaded from 129.2.19.102 on Thu, 11 Dec 2014 18:41:04 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

--- Page 7 ---
78 NONS
duciblyrelational;they are features of the relationsbetween a per-
son, with spatial and temporal boundaries of the usual sort, and
circumstances which may not coincide with him either in space or
in time. A man's life includes much that does not transpirewithin
the boundariesof his body and his mind, and what happens to him
can include much that does not take place within the boundariesof
his life. These boundariesare commonlycrossed by the misfortunes
of being deceived, or despised, or betrayed. (If this is correct,there
is a simple account of what is wrong with breaking a deathbed
promise.It is an injury to the dead man. For certain purposesit is
possible to regard time as just another type of distance.) The case
of mental degenerationshows us an evil that depends on a contrast
between the reality and the possible alternatives.A man is the sub-
ject of good and evil as much because he has hopes which may or
may not be fulfilled, or possibilities which may or may not be
realized, as because of his capacity to suffer and enjoy. If death is
an evil, it must be accounted for in these terms, and the impossi-
bility of locating it within life should not trouble us.
When a man dies we are left with his corpse, and while a
corpsecan sufferthe kind of mishap that may occur to an article of
furniture,it is not a suitable object for pity. The man, however, is.
He has lost his life, and if he had not died, he would have continued
to live it, and to possess whatevergood there is in living. If we apply
to death the account suggested for the case of dementia, we shall
say that althoughthe spatialand temporallocationsof the individual
who sufferedthe loss are clear enough, the misfortuneitself cannot
be so easily located. One must be contentjust to state that his life is
over and there will never be any more of it. That fact, rather than
his past or present condition,constituteshis misfortune,if it is one.
Neverthelessif there is a loss, someone must sufferit, and he must
have existenceand specificspatial and temporallocation even if the
loss itself does not. The fact that Beethoven had no children may
have been a cause of regret to him, or a sad thing for the world, but
it cannotbe describedas a misfortunefor the childrenthat he never
had. All of us, I believe, are fortunateto have been born. But unless
good and ill can be assigned to an embryo, or even to an uncon-
nected pair of gametes, it cannot be said that not to be born is a
misfortune.(That is a factor to be consideredin deciding whether
abortionand contraceptionare akin to murder.)
This approach also provides a solution to the problem of
temporal asymmetry,pointed out by Lucretius. He observed that
This content downloaded from 129.2.19.102 on Thu, 11 Dec 2014 18:41:04 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

--- Page 8 ---
DEAM 79
no one finds it disturbingto contemplatethe eternity preceding his
own birth, and he took this to show that it must be irrationalto fear
death, since death is simply the mirrorimage of the prior abyss.
That is not true, however, and the differencebetween the two ex-
plains why it is reasonableto regard them differently.It is true that
both the time before a man'sbirth and the time after his death are
times when he does not exist. But the time after his death is time of
which his death deprives him. It is time in which, had he not died
then, he would be alive. Therefore any death entails the loss of
some life that its victim would have led had he not died at that or
any earlierpoint. We know perfectlywell what it would be for him
to have had it instead of losing it, and there is no difficultyin iden-
tifying the loser.
But we cannot say that the time prior to a man'sbirth is time
in which he would have lived had he been born not then but earlier.
For aside from the brief margin permitted by prematurelabor, he
could not have been born earlier: anyone born substantiallyearlier
than he was would have been someoneelse. Thereforethe time prior
to his birth is not time in which his subsequent birth prevents him
from living. His birth,when it occurs,does not entail the loss to him
of any life whatever.
The direction of time is crucial in assigning possibilities to
people or other individuals.Distinct possible lives of a single person
can diverge from a common beginning, but they cannot converge
to a commonconclusionfrom diverse beginnings. (The latter would
representnot a set of differentpossible lives of one individual,but a
set of distinct possible individuals,whose lives have identical con-
clusions.) Given an identifiable individual, countless possibilities
for his continued existence are imaginable,and we can clearly con-
ceive of what it would be for him to go on existing indefinitely.
However inevitable it is that this will not come about, its possi-
bility is still that of the continuationof a good for him, if life is the
good we take it to be.
We are left, therefore, with the question whether the non-
realization of this possibility is in every case a misfortune, or
whether it depends on what can naturallybe hoped for. This seems
to me the most serious difficultywith the view that death is always
an evil. Even if we can dispose of the objectionsagainst admitting
misfortunethat is not experienced,or cannot be assigned to a def-
inite time in the person's life, we still have to set some limits on
how possible a possibility must be for its nonrealizationto be a
This content downloaded from 129.2.19.102 on Thu, 11 Dec 2014 18:41:04 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

--- Page 9 ---
80 NOUS
misfortune, (or good fortune, should the possibility be a bad one.)
The death of Keats at 24 is generally regarded as tragic; that of
Tolstoy at 82 is not. Although they will both be dead forever, Keats's
death deprived him of many years of life which were allowed to
Tolstoy; so in a clear sense Keats's loss was greater, (though not in
the sense standardly employed in mathematical comparison between
infinite quantities.) However, this does not prove that Tolstoy's
loss was insignificant. Perhaps we record an objection only to evils
which are gratuitiously added to the inevitable; the fact that it is
worse to die at 24 than at 82 does not imply that it is not a terrible
thing to die at 82, or even at 806. The question is whether we can
regard as a misfortune any limitation, like mortality, that is normal
to the species. Blindness is not a misfortune for a mole, nor would
it be for a man, if that were the natural condition of the human race.
The trouble is that life familiarizes us with the goods of which
death deprives us. If we put aside doubts about their status as goods
and grant that their quantity is in part a function of their duration,
the question remains whether death, no matter when it occurs, can
be said to deprive its victim of what is in the relevant sense a possi-
ble continuation of life. The situation is an ambiguous one. Observed
from without, human beings obviously have a natural lifespan and
cannot live much longer than a hundred years. A man's sense of his
own experience, on the other hand, does not embody this idea of a
natural limit. His existence defines for him an essentially open-ended
possible future, containing the usual mixture of goods and evils that
he has found so tolerable in the past. Having been gratuitously
introduced to the world by a collection of natural, historical, and
social accidents, he finds himself the subject of a life, with an
indeterminate and not essentially limited future. Viewed in this
way, death, no matter how inevitable, is an abrupt cancellation of
indefinitely extensive possible goods. Normality seems to have noth-
ing to do with it, for the fact that we will all inevitably die in a few
score years cannot by itself imply that it would not be good to live
longer. If there is no limit to the amount of life that it would be
good to have, then it may be that a bad end is in store for us all.
This content downloaded from 129.2.19.102 on Thu, 11 Dec 2014 18:41:04 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions
