In The Norton Introduction to Philosophy, eds. A. Byrne, J. Cohen, E. Harman, G. Rosen, and S. Shiffrin.
13
Do We Possess Free Will?
A Question about Responsibility
In March 2007, New York newspapers reported the brutal mugging of a 101-year-old woman in the lobby of her apartment building. As surveillance tapes show, the mugger held the door open for his victim, followed her inside, then donned a ski mask and beat her mercilessly for several minutes before fleeing with her purse.
This attack was not just a tragedy, as it would have been if the woman had been injured in a fall or mauled by an animal. It was a grotesque moral wrong and we blame the man who did it, which is to say that we hold the man morally responsible for his act.
This is not a special case. The conviction that human beings are morally responsible for what they do is deeply rooted in common sense. We take it for granted every day when we praise people for the good they do and blame them for the harm they cause. As a society, we take it for granted when we punish people for their crimes. As we usually think, this is one of the most important differences between human beings and other animals. (It may be perfectly natural to blame your dog for tracking mud all over the house, but in a cool moment you know this makes no sense. He's just a dog, after all.) But if this is right, there must be something about us that explains it. And so we ask--not in a skeptical spirit but in a spirit of open-minded curiosity--Why are we morally responsible for what we do when animals are not? What is it about us that makes us special in this regard?
The Free Will Hypothesis
Think about the mugger in the moments just prior to the attack. There he is, holding the door open for his victim and watching her walk through. As he does this he is buffeted by biological and psychological forces of many kinds, including, we may suppose, a powerful impulse to attack. But if we think he is responsible for
595

596C H A P T E R 1 3 : D o W e P o s s e s s F ree W i l l ?
his act, we must think that he is capable of resisting this impulse--of "stepping back" and deciding for himself whether to act on it. This ability is sometimes called free will--though this phrase is used in other ways as well. An act is free, on this conception, when the agent could have done otherwise. Before he acts, the free agent is in a certain psychological state: he has beliefs about his circumstances; he has desires, feelings, and values; he has various habits and capacities; and so on. In other animals, this prior state settles what the animal will do (insofar as anything settles it). Holding all of these factors fixed, an animal has no real options. For human beings as we normally understand them, by contrast, while these factors may strongly incline a person to make one choice rather than another, it is ultimately up to him to choose. According to the free will hypothesis, that is why we are normally responsible for what we do while other animals are not.
Let's put this cluster of commonsensical ideas under the microscope. It has several components.
1. A person is morally responsible for an action only if she performs it freely. 2. A person acts freely only if she could have done otherwise. 3. A person could have done otherwise only if her choice was not determined by
prior factors over which she had no control.
Taken together, these entail:
4. A person is morally responsible for an action only if her choice was not determined by prior factors over which she had no control.
But we've said repeatedly that as we normally think,
5. People are usually responsible for what they do.1
A nd so we have disclosed what might be called a presupposition of ordinary thought. If this commonsensical cluster of ideas is correct, then our practice of holding one another responsible--our practices of praise and blame, punishment and reward--take it for granted that
6. Typical human choices are not determined by factors over which the agent had no control.
And now that we have isolated this presupposition, we must examine it. We may take it for granted as we go about our business. But is there any reason to believe that it is true?
1.Why "usually"? Because we know that human beings are not always responsible for what they do. Someone who has been forced or hypnotized or tricked into acting badly is not responsible for what he does. Proposition 5 makes the commonsensical point that such excuses are not always available.

Free Will and Physical Determinism597
Doubts about Free Will
You might think that the claim is supported by introspection. Consider how it feels to make an ordinary choice. There you are, deciding whether to read the rest of this page or to take a break. Even if you're bored and really want to take that break, it may seem obvious that nothing literally "forces" you one way or the other. So it's tempting to think that the experience of conscious choice confirms that our choices are not determined in advance.
In fact, however, the experience of conscious choice shows no such thing. It may show that we are not normally aware of factors that determine our choices. But our choices might still be determined by factors of which we are unaware. (When you see a flash of lightning, you don't see what caused the flash, but that doesn't mean that nothing caused it!) The opponent of (6) suspects that our choices are determined by factors of which we are unaware. Introspection can do nothing to exclude this possibility.
Free Will and Divine Foreknowledge
Why might someone think that our choices are determined by factors of which we are unaware? One venerable argument comes from theology. If God is eternal and all-knowing, then God always knew--from the beginning of time--that the mugger would attack the woman. So assume there is such a God and focus again on the moment just before the mugger's choice. It may seem to him in that moment that he has two options: to attack or to walk away. But what he does not know is that before he was born, God predicted that he would attack. This prediction is settled; it lies in the past and the mugger cannot do anything about it. To say that he is nonetheless capable of doing otherwise is therefore to say that he is capable of falsifying God's prediction. And the trouble is that no one has that power. It is impossible for God to be mistaken, and so it is impossible for a person to act in a way that would cause God to have been mistaken.2 If every human choice is foreseen by an infallible God, it follows that everything we do is settled in advance by a factor--God's prediction-- that was in place before we were born. So if a free choice must be an undetermined choice, this theology entails that human freedom is an illusion. (See Nelson Pike, "Divine Omniscience and Voluntary Action," Philosophical Review 74, 1 [1965]: 27Ł46.)
Free Will and Physical Determinism
You can resist this argument by denying the existence of an eternal, all-knowing God. (You should ask whether there are other ways to resist it.) But a very different and wholly secular argument seems to lead to the same conclusion. From its origins in the
2.The view in question holds that it is part of God's essence to be infallible, just as it is part of the essence of a triangle to have three sides. No one can draw a four-sided triangle because four-sided triangles are impossible. Likewise, no one can falsify God's prediction because a mistaken God is impossible.

598C H A P T E R 1 3 : D o W e P o s s e s s F ree W i l l ?
seventeenth century, modern science seemed to confirm the ancient speculation that the universe as a whole is a deterministic system in which the state of the cosmos at any one time is determined by its state at any prior time, together with the laws of nature. On this view, the state of the universe at any point in the past--say, exactly 1 billion years ago--and the laws of nature together fix the state of the universe at every future time. If this view is correct, then given the past and the laws, absolutely everything that happens--every supernova, every mugging--is determined to occur just as it does.
It must be stressed that physical determinism of this sort is a scientific hypothesis. The physics of Newton and his successors, including Einstein, was for the most part deterministic. However, contemporary physics leaves open the possibility that the basic laws of nature assign probabilities to future occurrences without determining what will happen. Since physics is a work in progress, no one knows at present whether physical determinism is true. And this means that we should not assume determinism (or its opposite) in our philosophy.
Instead, we focus on the consequences of determinism. Suppose you wake up tomorrow to this headline:
Scientists Discover, Beyond Doubt: Universe Is a Deterministic System
What would this mean? It would mean that the motion of every particle, including the particles in our brains and bodies, was determined by the state of the universe a billion years ago together with the laws of nature. In particular, it would mean that it was settled a billion years ago that the particles in the mugger's brain and body would do just what they did, and hence that he would do just what he did. And, of course, the same would be true of every human action. So if a free act must be an undetermined act, this sort of physics entails that human freedom is an illusion.
This argument should worry anyone who accepts determinism. But it should also worry anyone--and this should be all of us--who is genuinely uncertain about whether the laws of physics will turn out to be deterministic. For if the argument is cogent, it shows that for all we know at present, human freedom is an illusion. And that is an unsettling thought. Think of the mugger again--or anyone else whom you regard as obviously responsible for what he's done. If this line of thought is sound, you have no right to this confidence, since for all you know, the whole business was settled eons ago by factors over which the agent had no control.
Free Will and Indeterminism
All of this may leave you hoping for a different headline. So imagine you wake up tomorrow to find this on the front page of the New York Times:
Scientists Discover, Beyond Doubt: Physical Universe Is Indeterministic

The Dilemma of Determinism599
Would this really be any better? Return to the moment just before the mugger's choice. His brain and body are in a certain state. Because the universe is indeterministic, this state does not determine his choice. Rather, the laws of nature assign a certain probability to a decision to attack and a certain (presumably lower) probability to a decision to walk away. Now a moment passes and he decides to attack. Why did he make that decision? If the process is genuinely indeterministic, this question may have no answer. When the choice was made, it was as if a coin were flipped in the mugger's head. His decision was a chance occurrence, a random fluctuation. And just as it is hard to see how a person can be responsible for a choice determined by factors beyond his control, it is hard to see how he can be responsible for a choice that simply happens in him as a result of random chance.
The Dilemma of Determinism
Putting these pieces together, we face what is sometimes called the dilemma of determinism:
A. If determinism is true, we are not responsible, since our choices are determined by factors over which we have no control.
B. If indeterminism is true, we are not responsible, since our choices are chance occurrences.
C. But either determinism is true or indeterminism is true.
D. Therefore, we are not morally responsible for what we do.
This is a profound problem. Common sense assures us that we are responsible because we are free to choose. The dilemma tells us that we cannot be free, and that we are therefore not responsible. The only way to vindicate common sense is to find some flaw in the dilemma. The selections below represent a range of strategies.
A. J. Ayer, Harry Frankfurt, and P. F. Strawson all reject (A). These writers are compatibilists who hold in various ways that we can be responsible for a choice even though that choice was determined in advance. Roderick Chisholm rejects (B), distinguishing mere chance occurrences, which have no cause, from genuine free choices, which are caused not by prior events but by "the agent himself."
Against all of this, Galen Strawson defends a version of the dilemma, arguing that there is no credible account of human choice that would vindicate our commonsensical view of ourselves as free and responsible.
Some philosophers have suggested that even if human freedom is ultimately an illusion, the illusion is unshakable in the sense that it is psychologically impossible for us to overcome it. To see what they may be getting at, try an experiment. Next time

600C H A P T E R 1 3 : D o W e P o s s e s s F ree W i l l ?
someone steals your parking space, try to persuade yourself that even though the act was selfish and obnoxious, it wasn't really the driver's fault, since no one is ever morally responsible for what he does. Next time you read a news story about a lying politician or a vicious murderer, try to tell yourself that your immediate reaction--that these people deserve blame and punishment--assumes an incoherent view of human action. Say to yourself, "For all I know, these acts are mere regrettable occurrences for which no one is responsible." The exercise will give you a vivid sense of what is at stake in this debate.

